---
title: Shape Up (Ryan Singer) - Notes
date: 2025-06-23 10:00:00 -500
categories: [book-notes, shape-up]
tags: [shape-up]
---

## Introduction
Guide How They do product development at Basecamp. 
### Growing Pains
When software teams start to grow some common struggles appear:
- Team members feel like project go on, with no end in sight.
- Product Managers can't find time to think strategically about the product.
- Founders ask themselves: "Why can't we get features out the door like we used to in the early days?"

There were tons of challenges faced by Basecamp, with trial and errors they figured out techniques that actually worked for the Basecamp.
Three people built the first version of the product, Json Fried, Basecamp's Founder, led the design, His co-founder David Heinemeier Hansson (DHH), programmed it (and created the well-known web framework Ruby on Rails as a by-product). Third one was a web designer focused on usability and user interfaces.

From the first prototype in July 2003 to launch in February 2004, David only worked ten hours a week and that was no enough. So the third person jumped into the programming world keeping his one foot in designing and one foot in programming world.
Here is the overview of the main ideas from the book.

### Six-week cycles
At base they work in six-week cycles.
- Six weeks is long enough to build something meaningful start-to-finish and short enough that everyone can feel the deadline is far from the start, so they use the time wisely.
- Decisions are also based on moving the product forward in the next six weeks, not micromanaging time.
- Not counting hours OR focusing on how individual spent their days.
- No daily meetings
- No rethink their road-map every two weeks.
- Instead their focus is at the higher level, They say "If this project ships after six weeks, we'll be really happy".

### Shaping the work
- They shape the work before giving it to a team. A small senior group works in parallel to the cycle teams.They define the key element of a solution before they consider a project ready to bet on.
- Projects are defined at the right level of abstraction: concrete enough that the teams know what to do, yet abstract enough that they have room to work out the interesting details themselves.
- When Shaping, They focus less on estimates and more on their appetite. Instead of asking: "How much time it will take to do some work?", they ask "How much time do we want to spend? How much is this idea worth?" This is the task of shaping: narrowing down the problems and designing the outline of a solution that fits within the constraints of our appetite.

### Making teams responsible
- They give full responsibility to a small integrated team of designers and programmers. They define their own tasks, make adjustments to the scope, and work together to build vertical slices of the product one at a time. Very different where managers chop up the work and programmer acts as ticket takers.
- When teams are more autonomous, senior people can spend less time managing them, with less time on management, senior people can shape up better projects.
- When projects are better shaped, teams have clearer boundaries and so can work more autonomously.

### Targeting risk
- At every step of the process they target a specific risk: the risk of not shipping on time.
- Improving your discovery process should come after regaining your ability to ship. e.g. You have best strategy in the world, but if you can't act on it, what good does it do?
- This is about risk of getting stuck, the risk of getting bogged down in previous quarter's work, wasting time on unexpected problems, and being free to do what you want to do tomorrow.
- They reduce risk in the shaping process by solving open questions before they commit the project to a time box.
- They reduce risk in the planning process by capping their bets to six weeks. If project runs over it won't get extension. Their "circuit-breaker" ensure that they don't invest unnecessary time on something that needs rethinking first.
- They reduce risk in the building process by integrating design and programming early. Instead of building lots of disconnected parts and hoping they'll fit together in the 11th hour, They built one meaningful piece of work end-to-end and repeat it.

Part One of this book is all about **Shaping** - the pre-work they do on projects before consider them ready to schedule.

Part Two of this book is all about **Betting** - how they choose among the pitched projects and decide what to do six weeks at a time.

Part Three of this book is all about **Building** - the expectation they place on the teams and the special practices they use to discover what to do.  